Welcome to the middle of the conference.
I hope everybody's found it
instructional so far and had a good time.
So we've actually got quite
a lot to cover this morning,
so I hope you've had your coffee,
and let's get started.
So this morning's session is sort of
an introductory session to I/O Kit or
possibly a refresher for some of
you who've spent some time there.
If this is not the session
you thought you were in,
this is your opportunity to bail.
We'll press on now.
So, what is I/O Kit?
Sort of in the simplest terms,
it is the device driver
model for Mac OS X.
And a little more specifically,
it is the driver model where
you write drivers in C++,
load them inside the kernel,
the Darwin kernel,
and they execute in that environment.
Applications talk to those drivers
indirectly by using mechanisms
across the user-kernel boundary,
a variety of plug-ins or
other system abstractions,
and we'll talk about those later.
So to kind of lay it
out for you graphically,
this is a simplified stack of sort
of the Mac OS X operating system.
Up above the dashed line there,
we have the user space where
all the applications run,
and they make use of the
various frameworks and libraries
to use the system services.
And the purple area is the kernel,
and within that it's subdivided
into a variety of technologies.
And the one we're going to be
focusing on today is over here,
is the I/O Kit space.
And that includes what we call families,
as well as the actual device drivers.
And we'll spend most of our time
this morning talking about those.
We will talk a little bit about
kecks in general a little later on,
which is all the gray
boxes in this diagram.
So when is it appropriate to use I/O Kit?
A lot of devices already are
supported with generic drivers
or facilities in the system.
So in those cases, you won't need to use
I/O Kit to write a driver.
Also, there are a variety of
applications where you would want
to have a user-land construct,
an application or utility,
talking to hardware.
Now, we don't consider this an
I/O Kit driver because it's
not running inside the kernel.
Some examples of this,
anything that uses the
image capture framework,
for example, cameras, scanners, printers,
these are all user-level plug-ins.
Now, they do use I/O Kit in that they use
it to communicate with their hardware,
but these drivers don't run
in an I/O Kit environment.
They actually run out in user-space.
And from I/O Kit's perspective,
they could just be any application.
So when I use the term
"applications" in this presentation,
I'm not referring just to
apps that the user launches.
I really refer to anything running,
any task or process running out of the
user-- out of the kernel address space.
These uses of I/O Kit use
the I/O Kit framework.
The I/O Kit framework is available for
applications and utilities outside of the
kernel to gain access to I/O Kit drivers.
Now, device drivers that must
run inside the kernel,
which is what we'll be
focusing on this morning,
there's a few criteria there that
help you kind of decide where
you want to put your driver.
Once you start looking at the
documentation and some other examples,
you'll probably be guided by
what other people have done,
but a lot of that comes down to
these three requirements here.
If you need direct
access to your hardware,
and I mean like register-level I/O,
you pretty much have to
be in the kernel for that.
If you require interrupt handling,
you pretty much have to
be in the kernel for that.
Also,
if your primary client is in the kernel,
this is really what's driven most
I/O Kit drivers into the kernel.
For example, storage drivers,
their primary client is
the file system layer.
So,
it only makes sense for storage drivers
to be below them in the architecture,
so therefore they're in the kernel.
Now, this is important.
The kernel framework is where you
will find all of the APIs that
you use inside the kernel.
This includes all of the
I/O Kit APIs that I/O Kit drivers use.
So, if you're writing an I/O Kit driver,
you do not use the I/O Kit framework.
I know that's kind of counterintuitive,
but look in the kernel framework.
That is the one and only framework
that you can use inside the kernel.
In that being said,
you really should try to avoid writing a
kernel-level driver if at all possible,
because it's harder to debug,
it's a more limited environment,
you don't have all the
frameworks available,
but it is necessary in a lot of cases,
so we'll press on and
talk about those cases.
Now,
I/O Kit has a number of design goals,
and I'm going to spend a minute
on philosophy here just so you
can kind of understand maybe
some of the decisions we've made.
So writing a device driver
in a modern operating system
is a very complicated task.
You have a lot of things to juggle.
From a scheduling perspective,
you have multiprocessor systems,
you have preemption to worry about.
You have multiple address spaces,
and now as you've seen
from sessions this week,
those address spaces
can be different sizes.
They're not all 32-bit
address spaces anymore.
Also, architecture neutrality,
also very important to Apple these days.
So I/O Kit needs to be able to cope
with various ndns and other variations
that can be even more subtle.
We also really want drivers to focus
on mechanism and not on policy.
And this actually has driven
a number of decisions that
we'll kind of hit on later on.
But what I mean by this is drivers
are there to service requests
from the user-space applications.
They're not there to generate I/O.
Now, there will be a few cases where
they have to generate I/O in the
course of doing their business,
and that's okay.
But all the I/O that they do
really should be either a direct
or indirect result of some
request that came in from above.
That's what I mean by mechanism.
They simply are there to serve.
I/O Kit is also intended to be
sort of a long-lived technology.
We really didn't want to encumber
it with any specific technology.
If you think back to
the classic Mac OS days,
the SCSI Manager, even though SCSI wasn't
really used very much,
sort of the end of the
days for Mac OS Classic,
the SCSI Manager was kind of
entrenched in the API set.
And even though people didn't
really use it for SCSI,
they used it for general disk management.
So we didn't want to have
something like that in I/O Kit that
was perpetuated forever.
So what we did was we took all of
the device or protocol-specific
stuff and split it out into
these things called families.
Well, they extend I/O Kit.
I/O Kit remains generic.
The families provide the
bus-specific protocols.
And of course, third parties can extend
I/O Kit either by writing families
or drivers within those families.
A word on the kernel environment here.
As I said, it's a little different from
programming in user space.
The Darwin kernel is a process,
just like any other
process on the system.
Well, not just like,
but it has a lot in common
with other processes.
It has threads.
It has its own virtual
memory address space.
So a lot of the general
concepts are the same.
But it doesn't have any of
the sort of the BSD process
attributes that you think of,
like you can't open file descriptors.
There's lots of things like that you
can't do within that environment.
So we inject code into the kernel task
using something called kernel extensions,
or KEXTs.
And we've got another speaker
coming up to talk about those
at the end of the session,
and we'll defer that for now.
All the code running in the
kernel address space shares
the same virtual address space.
We call it the kernel
virtual address space.
Very creative name there.
But you'll see it in documentation.
That's what it refers to,
is the address space that all the
code running in the kernel uses.
And it is not the same as
the physical address space,
and it's not the same as any
particular user virtual address space.
Within the kernel,
interfaces are called KPIs,
Kernel Programming Interfaces, and again,
they're present only in
the kernel framework.
I'll touch on this a little bit later,
but another aspect of programming in
the kernel environment is once your code
is running in the kernel environment,
you are trusted.
You basically have no bounds placed
on you as to what you can do,
so you have to program responsibly
if you're going to do that.
The user has to install
your kernel extension,
they have to authenticate
as an admin user to do that.
There's a level of trust there,
so it's very important that you
consider the security implications
of the code you're writing.
A few more constraints for the kernel.
When you're programming in the kernel,
you can think of it like a
sort of a long-running app.
When the app exits,
the machine is shut down,
either happily or sadly with a panic.
So, do not leak.
Make sure your drivers do not leak,
because the kernel memory
is wired by default.
When you allocate memory or
allocate an object in I/O Kit,
that is actual physical
memory you're pinning down.
It can't be paged out later.
So pay special attention to that.
Floating Point is unavailable
in the kernel generally.
It is possible to use it.
It's not trivially done,
so it's not something that
we'll be discussing today,
but you should assume
that it's not available.
Most libraries are not available.
We have a very incomplete
implementation of libc,
for example.
Even printf, you know,
not all the arguments or the different
format options are supported.
So it's a very minimalized
environment there.
This question comes up very frequently.
File I/O is not supported
from the kernel.
This is sort of a restatement of that
driver shouldn't be implementing policy.
A driver shouldn't be
opening and writing files.
If a driver needs some
information out of a file,
some higher-level entity
should open that file,
like a daemon or an application utility
should open that file and communicate
the contents down to the driver.
Debugging is via remote GDB.
Generally that's attached over Ethernet,
but it can also be done through FireWire.
C++ in the kernel.
So I/O Kit is C++.
We actually use kind of a restricted set.
It's very similar to the embedded
C++ effort from a few years ago.
We don't support
exceptions in the kernel.
Multiple inheritance are not used.
They're not supported.
Non-trivial constructors
are not supported.
Because we don't support exceptions,
you basically,
your constructors can't fail.
So you can't do anything in
them that could cause failure.
They're generally just for
trivial initialization.
So we don't have the
standard template library,
and we don't have the standard
RTTI support from C++.
We actually have our own variant
of that we call OS Metaclass.
So templates are partially supported,
and by that I mean we
don't use them in Apple,
we don't test them.
However, we've done nothing to prevent
them from working in the compiler.
So it's kind of a no-lifeguard
on duty situation,
but I know there are developers
who successfully use them.
And in general,
you're free to use any language feature.
If you can figure out a way to make a
Fortran compile and run inside a text,
You're welcome to do that.
As long as none of the
runtime requirements spill
over across the kex boundary,
it's not going to create any problems.
But basically,
we're using C++ as our ABI,
and that's what we're going
to be talking about today.
So, let's talk about classes.
The root class of everything
in the kernel C++ environment
is called OSObject,
and it provides basic object
services like introspection,
casting, things like that.
The reference counting is one
of the major things that you'll
encounter in I/O Kit objects,
so it is important to understand
how the reference counting works.
But it's basically when
you allocate an object,
it has a ref count of one.
When the ref count goes to zero,
that object is
automatically freed for you.
You should never call free
directly on an object.
You should use ref counts to manage that.
And this is so important,
you'll see it at least three
times in this presentation.
Make sure and use the OS declare
or OS define structure macros
for every class that you create.
This is a set of macros that generates
some additional information that our
binary compatibility patcher uses.
So when we load your text
on future operating systems,
we can patch the V tables so
that it will work correctly.
If you don't put these in,
your driver will probably work
until the next OS comes out.
So, the evil of this is if
you don't put it in there,
there's no immediate symptom.
It doesn't happen until your
driver's already out in the field.
We have a number of container
and collection classes.
I'm not going to go into these because
there's plenty of documentation on them.
They're basically object wrappers
that either contain other objects
or contain quantities or strings.
They're used for communication
with I/O Kit and for communicating
status and configuring drivers.
Now, probably the most important
class for anybody playing
an I/O Kit is I/O Service.
This is where the bulk of the
I/O Kit's implementation exists.
This is where the bulk of
the services are implemented.
So, you'll need to become very
familiar with this class.
Every driver class in
I/O Kit inherits from it,
and it handles things
like the driver lifecycle,
the matching in of drivers,
the initializing them,
tearing them down later.
Power management is driven
entirely out of this object.
Access control,
the ability to have one object owned
possibly by multiple drivers or
owned exclusively by a single driver,
there's implementation in there for that.
In general, service rendezvous,
how you find things in I/O Kit,
how you acquire them,
it's all done through I/O Service.
Now there's two different roles that
subclasses of I/O Service can play.
The first role is that of a driver.
This is the actual
implementation of something.
This is the code that knows how to take
a generic thing like a SCSI command
and get it out on the silicon,
out on the bus.
Okay,
that's the piece you're going to write.
The other object is called a nub,
and this is a little bit more conceptual.
It's more of an interface.
You often don't have to subclass these,
but these are the sort of the
units of attainable service.
When you publish a nub, you're saying,
"Here's a service.
Somebody else in the operating
system can acquire it,
can open it." If you have
multiple services you export,
you create multiple nubs.
Memory Management.
I won't spend a lot of time on these.
There's quite a lot there.
In fact, there's a whole other session
following this one that you
would probably want to attend.
I/O Memory Descriptor is just that.
It describes memory.
It's a class that we use as sort of a
universal token when we communicate an
I/O request across the various drivers.
It remembers what task
the request came from.
It knows if it's been mapped
into the kernel address space.
It knows if it's been wired.
It keeps track of all that.
So if one driver wires it down and
then the next driver goes to wire it,
it remembers that it's already wired.
So it's very efficient when
you have multiple drivers
acting on the same memory.
I/O DMA Command is sort of our
next generation replacement
for I/O Memory Cursor,
and it is necessary on the
new Intel 64-bit machines.
I won't spend a lot of time talking
about it because about half of
the following session in this
room is dedicated to this class.
But it basically will
take your constraints.
You'll say my DMA engine
is capable of this reach,
this stride, and so on.
And whenever you go to say, well,
here's an I/O Memory Descriptor,
I need to be able to hand this off down
into my hardware with these constraints.
It will do the right
thing on that hardware.
It'll either do the mappings,
it'll copy it if necessary
to double buffer,
and it also has API for getting
64-bit physical addresses,
which will be important.
Synchronization.
This is probably one of the
areas where I/O Kit diverges
from most other driver models,
and so you'll want to
pay close attention here.
I/O Kit's synchronization model
actually comes from the same
lineage as the CF run loop.
Actually,
I/O Kit has a common ancestor with Cocoa,
if you can believe that.
So, I/O Work Loop is basically, you can,
conceptually,
you can think of it as a thread.
It is, in fact, a lock and a thread,
and I'm not going to go
into the details here.
But the idea is, when you have something
attached to a work loop,
it won't ever be re-entered.
It guarantees that only one of
the things attached to the work
loop is executing at a time.
It's a way of serializing
access to your hardware.
Now, the way you do that is by attaching
these things called event sources.
An event source can be an interrupt,
it can be a timer, it can be an arbitrary
thing that you've created.
Maybe you've generated your
own command queue and you
attach that as an event source.
So the idea is that events come in,
like an interrupt or a timeout,
and you've specified a callback
with that event source.
When that event triggers, at some point,
hopefully very shortly
after the event triggers,
your handler will be called,
and it will be called in a
guaranteed synchronized manner.
This is actually a very simple mechanism,
and it's actually carefully
crafted to work well where you
have multiple drivers interacting
together that are not aware of each
other's internal locking structure.
It uses recursive spin locks so
that you can actually share a
work loop across multiple drivers,
and this is being done for you
whether you know it or not.
And it's done in a way to prevent
additional context switches as data
moves up and down driver stacks.
So it's intended to be
simple for you to use,
but it's also intended to be
very efficient for the system.
So pay attention and make sure
you're using it correctly.
Probably one of the number one pitfalls
that I've seen with people porting
drivers to Mac OS X is they say,
"Well, I've already got a locking
structure in this driver that works.
I'm not going to mess with it.
I'm just going to kind of cobble
on a work loop to the side to
get it to work with I/O Kit."
You will deadlock frequently.
It will not be a pleasant
debugging experience.
So I strongly recommend that
you don't try that approach.
If you can successfully go that way,
you'll be lucky, but you need to look at
I/O Work Loop carefully.
As I spoke about before,
I/O Kit families provide
bus or protocol-specific
implementation to the system.
And the families can be
introduced at any time.
Like the ADB family is
probably on its last legs.
There's not a lot of reason to
keep it around for many more years.
So they can come and go over time with
the core of I/O Kit remaining untouched.
And the way you can spot the
family API or I/O Kit API is
it has the I/O prefix.
Except for a few small exceptions,
every time you see the I/O prefix,
that's I/O Kit.
By that token,
you should not be writing anything
with an I/O prefix in your code.
That's for us.
Again, look in the kernel framework.
That's where all of the I/O Kit APIs for
in-kernel development go.
That's where all the family APIs go.
And the specific family
that you use depends on
What service your driver
is going to provide.
So you can think of it this way.
The PCI Ethernet adapter
that the user plugs in,
what is the user putting in?
They're putting in an Ethernet card.
That's what they care about.
That's where you look
to find your family.
A lot of developers will,
the immediate thought is, "Well,
I'm attached via PCI,
therefore I must go through the
PCI family." You will use the PCI family,
but that is not the service
that your driver is providing.
Here's a sort of short list of
families that are available.
Some of these are actually
sort of collapsed lists of
multiple sub-families as well.
There's quite a few to choose from,
and in fact your driver might
fall into the sort of category
we have of familyless drivers,
and that's entirely possible.
It just means you don't actually
inherit any implementation.
You can inherit straight
from I/O Service,
implement whatever you need to,
and you're not actually getting
any functionality from a family.
But it's not required that you
actually inherit from a family.
Another concept that's very
important to I/O Kit is something
we call the I/O Registry.
It is not the Windows Registry.
I'll say that again.
It is not the Windows registry.
Thanks.
It is not persistent.
It is actually the
network of live objects.
Right?
These are all the I/O Kit objects,
all the I/O Service objects,
sort of in this cloud.
And all the registry is is
just a collection of pointers
linking them together.
It's very simple.
We often speak of it
as this tree structure.
It is a tree structure.
It's actually a directed acyclic graph
because it is possible to have one
driver with two providers below it,
like in the case of RAID or
a few other rare cases.
But think of it as a tree.
We have one node at the bottom that
represents the platform itself,
the platform nub.
And then everything above that represents
more specific and more specific hardware
until you actually sort of get to
the boundaries where it steps out of
I/O Kit into some other family like the
file systems or the networking stacks.
So focusing in on just
two of the objects here,
we refer to the relationship here
as a client-provider relationship.
And the idea here is the NUB is
providing some service that the driver,
in this case, is a client of.
Simple as that.
In addition to the actual objects
that are running in the registry,
we have these dictionaries
attached to the side.
These are basically
collections of strings,
property names,
and values that can be used
to describe your driver.
You can use it for status.
You can use it for stats,
command and control.
It is,
you can think of it as sort of like
an I/Octal replacement in I/O Kit.
It's not high bandwidth.
You will not be doing disk
I/O through the registry,
but you will be discovering
maybe the capabilities of the
drive through the registry.
So every object in the registry has this.
There's a command line utility
called I/O Reg that will dump
the contents of the registry.
There's also an I/O Registry
Explorer app that will allow
you to graphically do this.
If you're new to I/O Kit, try I/O Reg.
You're going to learn a tremendous
amount just by poking around in there.
And of course,
apps use the registry as sort of
their main rendezvous mechanism.
They discover things by doing
searches on those dictionaries
that are hanging off the side.
We'll draw that in a bit.
There.
So, in this case,
we have an application which is using the
I/O Kit framework to search for a driver.
It's very common that you'll search
for a driver by class because
you know what you're looking for.
You can also search by
any variety of properties.
We've got a staggering array of
search capabilities in the registry.
And once you've found the object
that you're interested in,
you can communicate with it
simply by getting and setting
properties in the registry.
Or you can open up a high bandwidth
channel we call an I/O User Client,
and I'll spend time
talking about that later.
But basically it is a dedicated channel
that uses Mach IPC or Mach shared memory,
depending on the context,
to communicate across
the user-kernel boundary.
Okay, we've just spent a little
while talking about sort of the
high-level concepts in I/O Kit.
We've kind of taught
you basic vocabulary.
To drive that home,
I think we're going to go through
an example here of kind of how
you would go about piecing a
driver together using I/O Kit.
So if you're brand new to Mac OS X,
you need to discover developer.apple.com.
It has a fantastic search engine that
searches all the available documentation,
and I use it daily.
It's a very powerful tool.
So go there, browse it,
become comfortable with it.
We've created a few tutorials that
we thought would be useful for
getting people's feet wet sort
of on day one when they were first
exposed to kernel development.
So the first one is called Hello Kernel.
It is literally writing a kernel
extension that does nothing but
log Hello Kernels and then exiting.
So what you need to do is spend
the half a day or so it takes to
download this and experiment with it.
There's also a Hello I/O Kit tutorial
which takes that and puts the
C++ wrappers around it that
you'll need to have a driver
object interact with I/O Kit.
There's also a debugger tutorial
that talks you through setting
up the two-machine environment.
So we're writing a driver.
Where do we start?
Well, as I said before,
you need to think about the
service that you're vending
out to the operating system.
So a PCI Ethernet driver
presents an Ethernet interface.
A mouse driver provides
a pointing device.
In neither of those cases is the
method of attachment relevant,
at least not yet.
So in our exercise,
we're going to write a block storage
device that attaches via PCI.
This is a hypothetical device.
You can think of it as a
battery-backed-up RAM disk or
it could be some remote thing.
It doesn't really matter,
but it's a way of persistently
storing data through a PCI card.
And at this point in the exercise,
the fact that it's
PCI isn't really relevant.
So we have to select a family first.
Again, go to developer.apple.com.
If you go to the
I/O Kit Fundamentals document,
which I highly recommend, by the way,
there's Appendix A in there,
which is a family reference guide.
It has like a page for each
family that kind of gives you
the scope of what it covers.
That's your sort of first
stop to figure this out.
So you select an appropriate driver,
and then maybe you go search
Darwin for examples of drivers
written for that family.
So in our case,
we're going to discover the
Mass Storage Device Driver Programming
Guide,
and it's going to become clear that our
driver fits into the I/O storage family.
Now, the approach we're going to take
from a class perspective is a little
bit backwards than you might think.
And we wouldn't code in this order,
but this is the way
we're going to design.
So we're going to start at the top.
Again, we're service-oriented.
What service are we
exporting to the world,
to the OS in this case?
So we've got to determine
what our NUB class is.
Well, from looking at the headers
in our selected family,
we'll see this little quote here:
"The I/O Block Storage Device class
exports the generic block storage
protocol." That's what we're looking for.
So in our driver here,
the nubs are going to be of
class "I/O Block Storage Device."
A word on I/O Kit naming.
You'll very commonly
see the suffix "device."
For something that is
representing a device,
sort of the proxy for
a device in the system.
So this class,
when you instantiate one of them,
represents the actual device.
It is the software
embodiment of the device.
A lot of nubs have a
device as their suffix,
and you'll find that "driver"
is very commonly the suffix for
the other class we talked about.
So the base class.
This is the class that you're going
to use to write all your code in.
This is going to be the class
that then goes and publishes
that nub that we just discovered.
Now, our first way of determining what
class to use here is going to be,
again, to look at the nub class.
Very few nubs are completely agnostic.
They have some particular class
they want to be published by,
and so they'll usually point
you in the right direction.
And sure enough,
the transport driver can be of any type
as long as it inherits from I/O Service.
So it points us in the right direction,
just happens that it's
a very vague direction.
In this case, it doesn't matter.
Most nubs do care what their
providing class is going to be.
In our case, for this example,
it doesn't.
So we're just going to
inherit from I/O Service.
Now the third bubble down
on our I/O Registry graph is
going to be the Provider Class.
This is not a class that we write.
This is not a class that we instantiate.
This is something that is given to us.
This is handed to us as our way of
attaching and getting at our hardware.
So we call down into this object
to communicate to the hardware
that we're going to be driving.
In our particular example,
we know it's PCI.
This is where the attachment
method becomes relevant.
What's interesting here is we're not
inheriting any code from the PCI family.
All we're doing is calling into
an object that it provides,
in this case a nub called I/O PCI Device.
Again, the device suffix represents the,
indicates that the object you're
talking to is a proxy for the hardware.
In this case, it represents the
PCI hardware on the bus.
So, I've talked through that.
Let's look at it graphically.
So, on the top there, we have our nub,
which is going to be an I/O block
storage device subclass.
Our driver, where the meat of our
implementation is going to go,
is going to be a subclass of I/O Service,
and then I/O PCI device is
going to be our provider.
This is where we're going to
get access to our PCI card.
These are the parts
that we need to write.
Okay, we have to write code in our
NUB subclass and we have to write
code in our driver subclass.
And depending on the family and
depending on exactly what you're writing,
this can vary.
It's very common that you don't have
to write any code in your NUB at all.
Now another interesting thing
here is why split this up?
Why do we have two objects in
this hierarchy and why are we
writing code in both of them?
Seems like it would be
simpler to combine the two.
Well, this is a contrived
example that's very simple.
Most controllers can export
more than one device.
So it wouldn't be uncommon for
your controller to export two,
three, four nubs.
So when you think about that,
it makes more sense to have this split.
But if you do have a case where
you have a one-to-one relationship
between the controller and the nub,
in many cases I/O Kit does support
combining them into one class.
If you recall, the nub documentation
said that its provider,
the actual driver class,
could be any subclass of I/O Service.
Well, the nub itself is a
subclass of I/O Service.
So you can imply from that it
would be okay for the nub to
basically be driven by itself.
In this case, you could write all
your code in one blob,
and it would just simply publish itself.
You'll find there are not many
cases where this is actually useful,
but for sort of first time
experimenting with I/O Kit,
you might find it handy.
So, let's talk about
implementation a little bit.
We need to write the NUB class.
Again, this is the thing that
presents our interface,
our service out to I/O Kit.
And the details here are
going to be family specific.
We're not going to spend
a lot of time on APIs,
but we will talk about them a little bit.
So again, looking,
going back to our headers,
we find this comment.
A typical implementation for
a subclass relays all the
methods down to its provider,
which implements the
device-specific behavior.
So back in that stacked diagram,
the upper blue box that we're writing is
primarily going to just be pass-through.
And we've referred to this in the past
as sort of an impedance matching layer.
This is because we have two
I/O Kit objects stacked up that
don't inherit from a common tree.
Therefore,
they can't make assumptions about
what class the other one is,
and they can't cast.
So what we have to do is we use the nub
object as a intermediary that is aware of
the classes and can do the right thing.
And so it's basically simply calling
through directly down to its provider.
As I said before,
you're going to see this in a few places.
Here we're implementing a class.
Make sure and put these macros in.
Every time you implement a class,
make sure these are in.
The OS declare structures and
define structures are necessary
for binary compatibility.
So looking through the header,
we find we have to implement
about 20 methods in this subclass.
So let's look at what
that breaks down to,
just to give you an idea
of what you'll be facing.
Well, again,
most of them are simple down calls.
Fourteen of them are just sort of
capabilities and description functions,
like get the vendor name,
get the block size, get the block count.
These are very trivial
getter-setter functions.
So that leaves us with about
six that are actually important,
complicated functions.
On the data path,
we basically only have two.
We have doAsyncReadWrite,
and you'll notice the first argument
there is an I/O memory descriptor.
As I said,
we use memory descriptors as a token
to pass memory around between drivers.
Well,
this is where the block storage layer
is receiving a memory descriptor that
describes the memory that we're either
going to be reading from or writing into.
There's a block count, excuse me,
a block index and a block count,
and then there's a completion callback.
Pretty much all of the data APIs in
I/O Kit you'll find are asynchronous.
We use a callback,
and so that's what that's about.
Do synchronize cache is necessary for
basically guaranteeing that all the
writes that have happened down the
stack actually get flushed to media.
So we use this, I believe,
for our journaling to make sure
the metadata is flushed out.
Then there's a few methods
here for media management.
We've got the eject,
we've got something for
reporting the media state,
whether it's been inserted or not,
whether it's changed
since we last checked.
And there's also formatting
and locking the media.
Again, we're not going to go into those,
but these are just basic
operations for managing a device.
You can see sort of where the
complexity here is really is
around do async read/write.
Of course, there's also the additional
methods that we call driver
lifecycle methods that you have to
implement as being part of I/O Kit.
Init, start,
and stop are sort of the most basic ones.
There's additional
ones you can implement.
There's power management methods
you'll want to implement.
But the one thing I'll call out
here is in your start method,
in your nub, you're going to want to
call register service.
This is the thing that kicks off
a lot of activity in I/O Kit.
Register service says I am now available
and ready for the operating system
to start sending requests to me.
And I'll also point out your driver
cannot be located in the registry using
searching unless you've registered it.
The theory there is if you
don't register yourself,
you don't want to be found.
It's like having an unlisted number.
So somebody can still navigate the
registry and find you topographically,
but you can't do a generic search
and find an unregistered object.
So down to the driver class.
Again, this is sort of the bulk of
the implementation that you're
going to be thinking about.
This is where those commands coming
down from the nub are going to have to
actually be translated into something
that your PCI driver can actually,
or PCI hardware can actually execute.
So what you want to do here is try to
inherit as much behavior as possible.
In our particular exercise,
we inherit nothing because we're
using I/O Service as our superclass.
Different families will
have different details,
but basically we try to
embody as much common code in
the superclass as possible.
And your driver really only needs
to implement the differences or the
details that make your hardware unique.
One way of thinking about
it that I've seen people,
seen sort of the light bulb go off,
is don't think of the family
as a plug-in to your driver.
Think of your driver as
a plug-in to the family,
right?
The family is the thing
driving this whole operation.
It knows how the hardware works.
It knows how to tie in
with the rest of I/O Kit.
Your driver is a plug-in to that family
to give it hardware-specific details.
So your driver is responding
to the family as opposed to
controlling the way the family works.
Don't try to drive the family.
Your job is to drive the hardware.
Okay, so we're going to declare a
new subclass of I/O Service,
and again the macros.
Every time you declare a new class,
it's so important.
And probe and start are
our first two entry points.
Probe just basically says,
"Can you drive this
hardware?" And start says,
"Start driving this hardware."
Okay, again, we're going to have to
provide an init routine.
This is responsible for
setting up any structures,
anything that we're going to need
to do that's sort of trivial.
There's really not a
whole lot to say there.
When you call your init method,
you're probably going to want to
pass in some configuration data,
but it's basically standard
object-oriented coding here.
Attach is how you get
attached into the registry.
This is the method that actually creates
that link between provider and client.
And again,
start is what will be called on you
when the I/O PCI device below you is
ready for you to start driving it.
And again, you're going to have your nub
call Register Service to publish
itself out into the registry so
that other drivers can then attach
to it and start doing their thing.
Now, your driver class can instantiate
as many nubs as necessary.
If you've got a piece of
hardware that can run four
drives or 12 drives or whatever,
you can instantiate a nub for each drive.
Another important thing here is they
don't all have to be of the same class.
You can very easily write a
driver that supports two or three
different kinds of functions,
so the nubs can be dissimilar.
Okay, so we've got our driver class.
It's published in Nub.
It's gone through all that,
but we still have to
deal with our provider.
We have to gain access to our hardware.
So, to do that,
we're going to wind up calling
down into that driver a good bit.
As I said earlier,
I/O Workloop is designed to sort
of allow for sharing vertically
through the driver stack.
Well,
you get your Workloop from your provider.
There's a method called, oddly enough,
GetWorkloop.
And so when you get that,
you will synchronize all of your
operations on that work loop,
so when you call down to the provider,
you're sharing the same work loop he is.
In our particular case, it's a PCI,
I/O PCI device.
Now, what does that do?
Again, it's all PCI-specific.
It maps the base address registers
into your address space so you
can actually talk to the hardware.
It allows you to access config space.
It hooks you up to your interrupts.
You know, all the basic stuff you'd
expect from a PCI family.
You generally use it
mostly at setup time.
You very rarely will call
down into the PCI family to do
actual memory reads and writes.
You can,
and for generating config space access,
you probably will.
But once you've got
your registers mapped,
you pretty much are just doing reads
and writes straight to those registers.
That's unique to PCI.
If you're nubbed,
you're matching against the USB.
Obviously, you don't get registers to
talk to your USB device.
You're going to be calling other APIs.
Also, our provider is responsible for
matching our driver to the hardware.
If you remember, the IOPCI device nub,
its job in the system is to
present a piece of hardware.
It's a proxy for that piece of hardware.
So its job is to also then
go off and find a driver
that can drive that hardware.
So let's talk about
matching a little bit.
Matching starts off outside of
code in a driver's Info.plist file.
This is a dictionary,
it's actually an XML file.
I've presented it here in a slightly
more readable form than XML,
because otherwise it
wouldn't fit on the slide.
The idea here is that you basically
have a dictionary of what we
call I/O Kit personalities.
This is a property that's at the
top level of your Info.plist file.
Now, you'll notice it's plural.
I'm only showing one personality here,
but it is entirely possible for your
driver to have multiple personalities.
And what does that mean?
Well, you could have slightly similar
"There are a lot of different
hardware that you want to support,
and they can maybe be
supported by the same driver,
but you've got to have different
matching information for them.
Or maybe you want to have
a few different parameters,
and so you might create a
personality for each of them.
For our example,
we're just going to have one personality,
though.
And Apple Marketing has requested that
we call it Apple PCI Storage Thingy.
So, I'm getting ahead of myself here.
So, the name here actually
is completely irrelevant.
This is just a unique identifier.
Because it's a dictionary,
each entry has to have a unique name.
It's not really used by anything.
The Provider Class:
This tells I/O Kit what
class you need as a provider.
Again, you're writing your driver
to make calls down into,
in our case, PCI,
so it wouldn't work at all if
our driver somehow magically
got attached to a USB device,
because the map bar
functions don't exist there.
So this is basically saying don't
even consider this driver for
anything other than a PCI device.
Now the next two properties
are PCI-specific,
and these are things the PCI-nub is
going to look at to try to figure
out if your driver is a good match.
Just a couple random examples here:
I/O PCI match matches you against
the PCI vendor and device IDs.
There's a number of properties
you can look up in the PCI family,
so you can determine if it's
the main ID or the sub-ID.
You can also use bitwise and
if you want to do a wild mask.
The idea here is it's
a space-separated list.
If any of the IDs on that
space-separated list match,
then it's considered a match.
PCI Class Match.
This is similar,
except instead of looking at
the vendor and device codes,
it's looking at the class code,
which is a 24-bit quantity.
Again, it's PCI-specific.
The general rule, and again,
you have to look at the
family to know for sure,
but the general rule is if you've
listed multiple properties,
like these two,
Both of them must match for the
driver to be considered a match.
So it's an AND operation between all
the matching criteria you put in there.
Again, it's dependent on the family,
so look in the documentation for that.
Probe score.
This is a little bit under-documented.
This is a quantity that's used to
sort if you have multiple drivers
that may have made it this far.
So if you have multiple drivers
that all make it past the provider
class criteria and the other
family-specific matching criteria,
then we've got a multi-way
race we have to resolve.
So we sort based on probe score.
So you need to look at the family
documentation to get an idea of
what probe scores are reasonable.
1,000 is the default probe score.
If you have a driver that's
specific to your vendor,
If you have a vendor-specific
driver or a device-specific
or device-family-specific,
you're going to want to put a
higher probe score so that you win
out over a generic device driver.
You also have to tell
I/O Kit what class to instantiate.
This is the actual class name
that we're going to pass off into
the OS Meta Class stuff and say,
"Conjure one of these up." And so after
we've loaded your KEXT into the kernel,
we'll go and create one of
these and attach it to the
IOPCI device provider class.
That's how the whole stacking starts off.
So, crossing the user-kernel boundary.
This is actually, in many cases,
not going to be necessary for you to do,
because if you're writing, in our case,
a blocked storage driver,
there's really no reason for
us to provide a new mechanism.
Mac OS X already has perfectly
fine storage APIs for file
systems to mount and so on.
So, it doesn't really apply
so much to our example,
but if you're writing a driver that does
need some kind of a custom interface,
there's a couple possibilities here.
So, again,
mass storage and networking is serial.
All use BSD style,
either sockets or device nodes.
And then most of the other
families provide other mechanisms
for getting at devices,
generally I/O user clients.
But if you want to roll your own,
you can.
And as I showed you before
on one of the graphics,
there's two ways to have your app
communicate down to your driver.
The first way is very I/O control-like.
It's using the registry
to get and set properties.
It's...you're going to have
to use the registry to find
your driver in the first place.
So you've already gone through...
90% of what you're going to
have to do to find the device,
and then you can simply start getting
properties on it or setting it.
If you need something
that's higher bandwidth,
you need to move either large
amounts of memory or you need
to move memory very quickly,
you can use an I/O User-Client subclass.
Now, why do we call it I/O User-Client?
I'll show you a graphic in
a second that'll make it
maybe a little more clear.
But the idea here is from a
kernel driver perspective,
You have a client that
lives in the user space.
That's literally where
the name came from.
So this is an object that lives
in the kernel that is a proxy
for some out-of-kernel client.
They're fairly simple.
You can write a user client in
just a few dozen lines of code.
There's an example on the DTS website.
You can look for,
I believe it's just called
Simple User Client Example.
They're very versatile.
You can do quite a lot with them.
And they are efficient.
So it's sometimes hard to look at a
C++ class and get an understanding
of sort of what's underneath the hood
and know if it's going to be a pig
or if it's going to be efficient.
In this case,
we make these very efficient because we
use them quite a bit in our own code.
So they have to work well.
So the basic process is you define a
sort of an indexed array of entry points.
So you can think of it as
simply numbered entry points.
And you define them in a header
that's going to be common to both your
user-space code and your kernel code.
Then you have an either your
application directly or if you're
creating a library or a plug-in,
that code creates a stub function for
each of those numbered entry points.
And then that's going to call
into an I/O Kit library function
that basically says call index
number blah on this object.
On the kernel side,
you create an I/O user client subclass.
And that's what actually
implements the entry points.
All right,
there's actually some subtlety here,
and I'll go through it graphically
again just so you understand.
But step one,
the application uses the framework
to locate the thing of interest.
In this case,
we have properties on a nub.
Once it's discovered it,
it can then create a direct
connection to a user client.
Now you notice that user client was
conjured up as part of this process.
So what happens is the app
calls I/O Service Open,
and that basically
will cause your driver,
if it has a user client defined,
to conjure one of those user clients up.
And it's very important to
understand is this user client
is private to your application.
If there are three apps
all talking to your driver,
each one will get a private
copy of the user client.
This is very important
for asset tracking,
because if you have
multiple I/Os in flight,
and one of the three apps crashes,
we have to know what I/Os to terminate
or who to send the response to.
So each user client
represents one user client.
And that VINs our custom API.
Okay, so now if the app crashes,
the user client is notified.
It discovers that the client,
the thing it's
representing has gone away.
Now it's still stacked
there in the kernel.
It still has this nub open and
potentially has in-flight IOs going.
So its responsibility is
to clean that mess up.
It's either got to terminate
the IOs if that's possible,
or it's got to wait for them to complete.
It's got to release any in-kernel
resources that are being
held on that user's behalf.
This is very important
because if you don't,
it's possible now for a user
application to cause kernel
resources to be permanently pinned.
So the user client must
clean up after itself.
The idea is this needs to
be completely symmetrical.
Once it's gone,
it needs to leave no traces.
So as I said before,
our user client provides a
custom interface to our drivers,
something the I/O Kit doesn't
provide by default.
The problem with this is,
it also provides our custom
APIs to any software.
This is very, very important.
When you're designing your user client,
remember I said all code running
in the kernel is trusted.
Well, the user client is a bridge
between the user and kernel space.
We trust your code in the kernel,
therefore it needs to be trustworthy.
So the user-client subclass must
defend against inappropriate access.
Now there's some very basic things.
This is very much like what
you would think of when
writing a set UID application.
So first off,
make sure your API is minimal.
Don't implement more than you need to.
Don't write "dev kmim" in your
user-client just because you can.
Okay?
That would be very bad and it
would not serve your users.
Don't receive kernel pointers.
You cannot trust a pointer
coming in from user-space in an
attempt to reference kernel code.
So, for example, if you wanted to have an
API that handed a pointer,
a kernel address out to user-space,
and then later let it
send it back to you,
you cannot dereference that pointer.
You don't know if it's still valid.
You don't know if it's
been modified by the user.
So you would want to use a hash table or
some other mechanism to make sure that
you can validate that address yourself.
Invalidate the client credentials.
It's possible for you to determine
if the client is a GUI session.
It's possible to determine if
it's privileged or an admin user.
There are a few APIs for that.
So if you can restrict the users that
would be able to access your device,
do that.
But please, please, please,
if you're writing user-client,
think about this.
It's very important.
Okay, thank you very much.
With that, I'd like to hand the
stage over to Nik Gervae.
He's going to come up and talk
about text management now.
Is the mic on?
Yes, it is now.
All right.
So Dean talked about what you're
going to do to build a KEXT.
I'm going to talk to you about how
you deploy it and the tools you use.
So first off, what is a KEXT?
It's basically a bundle,
and it is the plug-in
format for a kernel.
It is, at core,
a relocatable object file, unlinked yet.
It's packaged in a bundle
directory with an info dictionary,
and that's pretty much
all that a KEXT is,
is an info dictionary and a binary.
The info dictionary identifies the
KEXT in version by CFBundle identifier
and lists the matching
personalities as Dean covered.
Those are used to match I-O kit
drivers and load them into the kernel.
The other kinds of KEXTs are
loaded via different mechanisms.
It also lists libraries needed.
We haven't covered that so far.
Most applications,
you'll list the libraries in Xcode.
They get linked when you build it.
That's not how things work with KEXTs.
Those get linked at load time.
KEXTs themselves can serve as libraries.
In fact,
all of those families Dean listed
earlier are loadable KEXTs.
And even the kernel itself is
represented as a set of library KEXTs.
The kernel itself lives
in slash as Mach kernel,
but there are a bunch of pseudo KEXTs,
as we call them.
They don't have an object file,
but they do have version
information and compatibility.
The dependencies that you declare
go under the OS Bundle Libraries
property in your info dictionary.
Each key is a bundle identifier,
such as com.apple.kpi Mach,
if you need to use Mach resources.
And the values are version strings.
This is basically whatever version you
need or any compatible later version.
For kernel components,
you use com.apple.kpi.mocbsd/libkern
or I/O Kit.
If you need compatibility
with pre-Tiger systems,
you can use...
:com.apple.kernel and any of those.
And I've got something on my
screen that I didn't want.
There we go.
You should not mix those.
KPI is a new mechanism as of Tiger.
.kernel is the older mechanism.
Don't mix them.
It may work,
but you will run into problems.
And also,
you can use the new keckslibs program
to find any declarations you need.
As I mentioned before,
kecks aren't linked when you build them.
You won't know until you try to
load it which families you need.
But if you run keckslibs,
it will actually tell you,
and you can even ask it
to present that as XML.
You can just paste it into your project.
The tools that you
actually use are these:
kextload is what you'll
use during development,
kextunload when you're done,
you can unload your KEXT.
It is the standard load and
unload API for non-I/O Kit KEXTs.
So you guys are only going to be using
this when you're doing development,
basically.
Another program is kextee.
This is a continuously running daemon.
It loads drivers on
demand from the kernel,
and it is the standard load
mechanism for I/O Kit KEXTs.
New in Leopard is the kextlabs
program that I just mentioned.
Once you've built your KEXT,
you can just run this program on it.
It will tell you what libraries
you need to declare in order
to then have it load properly.
KextStat lists running KEXTs in
the kernel by bundle ID and version
with dependency information as well.
It will actually show you what
KEXTs your KEXT is linked against.
Some advanced programs that
we use for system optimization
are kextcache and mkextunpack.
You probably won't need to
worry about those at first.
And finally, another new feature in
Leopard is kextfind.
You can ask it to find
KEXTs with a given bundle ID,
with various properties,
any KEXTs that have problems.
like find command for
the extensions folder.
When you use kextload,
this is used as both a development
and a diagnostic tool at present.
While you're using development,
doing it for development,
you'll use kextload
manually to load your KEXT.
If you have any problems,
you run kextload-nt.
I can't tell you how many times
people within Apple call me and say,
I'm having a problem with my KEXT.
It won't load.
I say, run kextload-nt, and they go, oh,
there it is.
There's my problem.
As a deployment tool,
you're only going to need to
use this with non-IO kit KEXTs,
usually via an exec call.
Some running application
will set up the command line
arguments and then do an exec.
You should avoid using dash-t or
other interactive and development
options when you use it this way.
Basically,
only use the dash-b option for bundle ID,
dash-d to list an explicit dependency,
and dash-i to specify an alternative
directory for dependencies.
Now, as far as installing
kernel extensions go,
keep in mind that kecks are much
more sensitive than other software.
They are loaded into the kernel
environment and can pretty
much do anything they want.
So when you install your kecks,
it has to be installed as
owned by a root and wheel,
and it must not be
writable by group another.
You should also make sure that your
kecks get installed atomically.
You don't want a partially written
kecks even being considered
for loading into the kernel.
So make sure you copy the whole
thing to a temporary directory
on the boot volume first,
then change its owner group
of permissions as needed,
and move it atomically
into the extensions folder.
When you're done,
you can run a touch command on the
system library extensions folder and
send a SIGHUB to kexty if it's running,
and you should check for that.
That will cause all of the caches
that we build to be updated.
Don't go poking around
for caches yourself.
Don't look for them.
They do move around and see the technical
QA 1319 for more details and specifically
for compatibility information
with older versions of the OS.
And now that we've shot a fire
hose of information at you,
you can go look for these other
titles on the ADC website.
Dean's already mentioned a few of these.
We've got the Kernel Extensions Concepts,
Hello Kernel, Hello I/O Kit,
and Hello Debugger,
which walks you through doing
a two-machine debug session.
The I/O Kit Fundamentals document,
which is more conceptual,
and then related sessions today,
which include the following sessions,
64-bit I/O Kit Drivers,
the I/O Technologies Overview,
and our lab later this week.
There we go.